# Interaction patterns emerge from the interplay among abundance, behaviour and spatial constraints in mutualistic networks

**Abstract**:

Mutualistic interactions between species form complex networks that shape evolutionary and ecological processes. Traditionally, these networks have been studied at the species level, with species abundance and traits proposed as key structuring mechanisms. However, such approach often fails to explain commonly observed topological patterns. This limitation may stem from overlooking fine-scale interactions between individuals, the actual network building blocks. By shifting the focus from species to individuals, here we aim to better understand the mechanisms shaping mutualistic networks using plant--pollinator assemblages. To do so, we combined individual-based field data and agent-based models (ABMs) within a Bayesian framework. We found that explaining a key network structural pattern, the pollinator community degree distributions, required accounting for species abundances, distinct pollinator behaviours, and spatial plant configurations. Notably, these factors explained a substantial portion of the degree distribution variation even without including specific trait-matching mechanisms. Moreover, our predictive ability varied across different phenological stages, highlighting that distinct mechanisms operate across time. By integrating empirical data with individual-based modelling, we were able to capture details of actual interactions occurring in the real world, revealing how fine-scale processes shape community-wide network structure and offering new insights into the emergence of complex ecological networks.

**Data and code**:
All data and code necessary to replicate the results of this study are available in this repository. The /Model folder contains all raw plant–pollinator site and interaction data(/Model/Data) and Python code with agent-based models. A simulation can be generated using the *main_slicesv2.py* file within the \Model folder. The /Output_model folder contains the results from the simulation models and any necessary data to perform subsequent analyses to replicate all results and figures with the code contained in the /Analysis_code folder. Code was created with *R version 4.3.1 (2023-06-16)*.
